_pages/projects_students.md, before:

---
title: Student projects
layout: single
permalink: /projects/students/
sidebar:
  nav: "projects"
---

We are always looking for Master's students to join the lab to work on projects. All projects are estimated to last between three and six months and basic programming knowledge is required. Please contact us if you are interested in working with us.

### Text mining beyond PubMed

Text mining of the biomedical literature has been successful in retrieving interactions between a broad spectrum of biomedical entities. The Jensen lab is co-developing a range of widely used databases cataloging associations such as STRING for protein–protein interactions, DISEASES for disease–gene associations, and STITCH for chemical–protein interactions. A central component of all resources is the automatic mining of abstracts and open access full texts available in PubMed. For more information about the resources is available [here](/resources/).

[Recent work](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005962) indicates that the incorporation of additional articles yields considerable improvements in the inference of associations from text. Motivated by these findings, the main focus of this project is to explore resources for text mining beyond PubMed and to study the effect of incorporating different additional source on the quality of the identified associations. The quality will be measured by comparing predicted associations to a gold standard of expert-curated associations. Potential sources of text are 10000+ relevant preprints available in bioRxiv, patents available via USPTO, clinical trial records or proposals of funded research grants.

The project is ideal to get started with co-occurrence based text mining approaches, improve your skills on the command line for handling and cleaning large data files as well as to become more proficient in a programming language used for data analysis (such as Python).

Project advisors: [Alexander Junge](/people/alexanderjunge/) and [Lars Juhl Jensen](/people/larsjuhljensen/)

Projected starting date: as soon as possible

Commit message:

Add project on text mining rare diseases

_pages/projects_students.md, after:

---
title: Student projects
layout: single
permalink: /projects/students/
sidebar:
  nav: "projects"
---

We are always looking for Master's students to join the lab to work on projects. All projects are estimated to last between three and six months and basic programming knowledge is required. Please contact us if you are interested in working with us.

### Text mining beyond PubMed

Text mining of the biomedical literature has been successful in retrieving interactions between a broad spectrum of biomedical entities. The Jensen lab is co-developing a range of widely used databases cataloging associations such as STRING for protein–protein interactions, DISEASES for disease–gene associations, and STITCH for chemical–protein interactions. A central component of all resources is the automatic mining of abstracts and open access full texts available in PubMed. For more information about the resources is available [here](/resources/).

[Recent work](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005962) indicates that the incorporation of additional articles yields considerable improvements in the inference of associations from text. Motivated by these findings, the main focus of this project is to explore resources for text mining beyond PubMed and to study the effect of incorporating different additional source on the quality of the identified associations. The quality will be measured by comparing predicted associations to a gold standard of expert-curated associations. Potential sources of text are 10000+ relevant preprints available in bioRxiv, patents available via USPTO, clinical trial records or proposals of funded research grants.

The project is ideal to get started with co-occurrence based text mining approaches, improve your skills on the command line for handling and cleaning large data files as well as to become more proficient in a programming language used for data analysis (such as Python).

Project advisors: [Alexander Junge](/people/alexanderjunge/) and [Lars Juhl Jensen](/people/larsjuhljensen/)

### Text mining for rare diseases

The goals of this project are to perform text mining for rare human diseases and to assess the results so that they can be integrated into the [DISEASES](http://diseases.jensenlab.org) resource.

Approximately 6-7000 rare diseases have been identified, and each affect less than 1 in 2000 people.  However, collectively they affect around 10% of the population and are serious, often chronic and progressive, diseases. They are often, but not always genetic diseases, and some have no known cause.  Due to their collective importance to human health, we would like to develop computational methods to study them as a group.  One approach to do this is to use text mining to automatically read the literature and to extract information about which genes are associated with which diseases.  This approach enables the information found in free form scientific articles to be automatically structured and placed in a database so that it can be searched and reused easily.

The DISEASES resource created by the Jensen lab in 2015 uses text mining and experimental evidence to expose connections between diseases and the genes that are associated with them. DISEASES does not yet include rare diseases. This project involves conducting the text mining to enable rare diseases to be added to the database. Because we expect that many fewer articles are written about rare diseases than about common diseases, we must first test that our text mining approach will provide useful information about rare diseases.

Resources:
[DISEASES](http://diseases.jensenlab.org),
[Disease ontology](http://disease-ontology.org/),
[Monarch ontology](https://monarchinitiative.org/disease),
[Orphanet ontology](https://bioportal.bioontology.org/ontologies/ORDO)


Project advisors: [Alexander Junge](/people/alexanderjunge/) and [Lars Juhl Jensen](/people/larsjuhljensen/)
