_pages/training.md, before:

---
title: Training
layout: single
permalink: /training/
sidebar:
  nav: "training"
---
The group is on a regular basis involved in running training events, which take the forms of guest lectures on Masters and Ph.D. courses, week-long practical courses, and half-day to two-day workshops. The topics usually relate directly to the [resources](/resources/) that we develop, in particular the STRING database, the Cytoscape stringApp, and text mining.

Below you can find training material as well as lists of upcoming and past events. Feel free to [contact us](mailto:lars.juhl.jensen@cpr.ku.dk), if you are interested in us running or being part of a training event.

## Training material

As part of running recurring training events, we maintain up-to-date exercises on the following topics:

* [STRING database](/training/string/)
* [Cytoscape stringApp](/training/stringapp/)
* [Text mining](/training/textmining/)

Additional training material on other topics is linked to from the events below.

## Upcoming events

5--10 November 2018, Rome, Italy  
EMBO Practical Course on Computational Analysis of Protein--Protein Interactions

25 October 2018, São Pedro, Brazil  
STRING/Cytoscape Course

4--10 October 2018, Luxembourg, Luxembourg  
EMBO Practical Course on Phenotyping Neurological Syndromes for Systems Genetics

20--21 September 2018, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Bioinformatics for Human Biologists

## Past events

30 June 2018, Torún, Poland  
Microbiome Text Mining Workshop

13 June 2018, Wuhan, China  
STRING/Cytoscape Workshop

9--13 April 2018, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Statistical Methods in Bioinformatics

6 March 2018, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Fundamental Bioinformatics

5--9 February 2018, Cantanhede, Portugal  
From Protein Structure to Biological Function through Interactomics

24 January 2018, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Cytoscape/STRING Workshop

25--26 October 2017, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Microbiome Data Interpretation Workshop  
[Material](https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B3LtU3DLB8MQUGRsLWdWSEY0OWs)

16 October 2017, Bergen, Norway  
Applied Structural Bioinformatics

21 September 2017, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Bioinformatics for Human Biologists

20 June 2017, Melbourne, Australia  
Utilising STRING App for Cytoscape

9 June 2017, Hillerød, Denmark  
Statistics on Big Biomedical Data

23--24 May 2017, Aarhus, Denmark  
STRING/Cytoscape Workshop

3--7 April 2017, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Statistical Methods in Bioinformatics

14 March 2017, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Fundamental Bioinformatics

22 September 2016, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Bioinformatics for Human Biologists

19--23 June 2016, Heidelberg, Germany  
EMBO Practical Course on Computational Biology

30 May--4 June 2016, Budapest, Hungary  
EMBO Practical Course on Computational Analysis of Protein--Protein Interactions  
[Material](http://aidanbudd.github.io/ppisnd/programme.html)

16--20 May 2016, Rostock, Germany  
Integration of Data and Models in Medicine

12--15 March 2016, Bertinoro, Italy  
Bioinformatics Spring School

11 March 2016, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Fundamental Bioinformatics

8--13 March 2015, Safed, Israel  
The Literature Text Mining Approach In Cancer Research  
[Material](https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B3LtU3DLB8MQbnQzdUUyNUhNR00)

21 October 2015, Lyngby, Denmark  
Chemoinformatics in Drug Discovery

28 September--3 October 2015, Norwich, United Kingdom  
EMBO Practical Course on Computational Analysis of Protein--Protein Interactions  
[Material](https://aidanbudd.github.io/course_EMBO_at_TGAC_PPI_Sep2015/)

17 September 2015, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Bioinformatics for Human Biologists

24--26 June 2015, Warsaw, Poland  
In silico Drug Discovery

12 June 2015, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Statistics on Big Biomedical Data

17--22 April 2015, Okinawa, Japan  
EMBO Practical Course on Computational Biology

9 April 2015, Osaka, Japan  
Honor Seminar at Osaka University

21--27 March 2015, Bertinoro, Italy  
Bioinformatics Spring School

3 March 2015, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Fundamental Bioinformatics

28 September--3 October 2014, Cape Town, South Africa  
EMBO Practical Course on Computational Analysis of Protein--Protein Interactions

3--9 April 2014, Puerto Varas, Chile  
EMBO Practical Course on Computational Biology

22--26 March 2014, Bertinoro, Italy  
Bioinformatics Spring School

14 March 2014, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Fundamental Bioinformatics

21--25 October 2013, Sydney, Australia  
EMBL-Australia Masterclass on Protein Sequence Analysis

29 September--4 October 2013, Nevşehir, Turkey  
EMBO Practical Course on Computational Biology

19 September 2013, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Bioinformatics for Human Biologists

24--25 June 2013, Martinsried, Germany  
MaxQuant Summer School

15 March 2013, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Fundamental Bioinformatics

2--6 March 2013, Seeon--Seebruck, Germany  
Bioinformatics Spring School

15 November 2012, Lyngby, Denmark  
Chemoinformatics in Drug Discovery

13--14 November 2012, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Mass Spectrometry-based Proteomics and its Applications in Biology

14--20 October 2012, Girona, Spain  
EMBO Practical Course on Computational Biology

1--5 October 2012, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Bioinformatics for Human Biologists

2--8 September 2012, Berlin, Germany  
EMBO Practical Course on Computational Analysis of Protein--Protein Interactions

17--21 March 2012, Hainburg, Austria  
Bioinformatics Spring School

17 November 2011, Lyngby, Denmark  
Chemoinformatics in Drug Discovery

15 November 2011, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Mass Spectrometry-based Proteomics and its Applications in Biology

27--30 September, Heidelberg, Denmark  
EMBO Practical Course on Protein Bioinformatics Tools

6--13 August 2011, Reykjavík, Iceland  
EMBO Practical Course on Computational Biology

26--27 May 2011, Martinsried, Germany  
MaxQuant Summer School

12--16 March 2011, Ronzano, Italy  
Bioinformatics Spring School

18 November 2010, Lyngby, Denmark  
Chemoinformatics in Drug Discovery

16 November 2010, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Mass Spectrometry-based Proteomics and its Applications in Biology

14--15 March 2010, Hohenkammer, Germany  
Bioinformatics Spring School

26 January 2010, Lyngby, Denmark  
Workshop on Drug Discovery Informatics

19--22 January 2010, Heidelberg, Germany  
Exploring Modular Protein Architecture

19 November 2009, Lyngby, Denmark  
Chemoinformatics in Drug Discovery

16--22 August 2009, Shanghai, China  
EMBO World Practical Course on Computational Biology

14 May 2009, Lyngby, Denmark  
BioSys Workshop

22--26 March 2009, Bertinoro, Italy  
Bioinformatics Spring School

Commit message:

Added upcoming training events in Odense.

_pages/training.md, after:

---
title: Training
layout: single
permalink: /training/
sidebar:
  nav: "training"
---
The group is on a regular basis involved in running training events, which take the forms of guest lectures on Masters and Ph.D. courses, week-long practical courses, and half-day to two-day workshops. The topics usually relate directly to the [resources](/resources/) that we develop, in particular the STRING database, the Cytoscape stringApp, and text mining.

Below you can find training material as well as lists of upcoming and past events. Feel free to [contact us](mailto:lars.juhl.jensen@cpr.ku.dk), if you are interested in us running or being part of a training event.

## Training material

As part of running recurring training events, we maintain up-to-date exercises on the following topics:

* [STRING database](/training/string/)
* [Cytoscape stringApp](/training/stringapp/)
* [Text mining](/training/textmining/)

Additional training material on other topics is linked to from the events below.

## Upcoming events

5--10 November 2018, Rome, Italy  
EMBO Practical Course on Computational Analysis of Protein--Protein Interactions

25 October 2018, São Pedro, Brazil  
STRING/Cytoscape Course

4--10 October 2018, Luxembourg, Luxembourg  
EMBO Practical Course on Phenotyping Neurological Syndromes for Systems Genetics

20--21 September 2018, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Bioinformatics for Human Biologists

13 September 2018, Odense, Denmark  
Workshops in Applied Bioinformatics

13 September 2018, Odense, Denmark  
STRING and Cytoscape Tutorial

## Past events

30 June 2018, Torún, Poland  
Microbiome Text Mining Workshop

13 June 2018, Wuhan, China  
STRING/Cytoscape Workshop

9--13 April 2018, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Statistical Methods in Bioinformatics

6 March 2018, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Fundamental Bioinformatics

5--9 February 2018, Cantanhede, Portugal  
From Protein Structure to Biological Function through Interactomics

24 January 2018, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Cytoscape/STRING Workshop

25--26 October 2017, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Microbiome Data Interpretation Workshop  
[Material](https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B3LtU3DLB8MQUGRsLWdWSEY0OWs)

16 October 2017, Bergen, Norway  
Applied Structural Bioinformatics

21 September 2017, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Bioinformatics for Human Biologists

20 June 2017, Melbourne, Australia  
Utilising STRING App for Cytoscape

9 June 2017, Hillerød, Denmark  
Statistics on Big Biomedical Data

23--24 May 2017, Aarhus, Denmark  
STRING/Cytoscape Workshop

3--7 April 2017, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Statistical Methods in Bioinformatics

14 March 2017, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Fundamental Bioinformatics

22 September 2016, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Bioinformatics for Human Biologists

19--23 June 2016, Heidelberg, Germany  
EMBO Practical Course on Computational Biology

30 May--4 June 2016, Budapest, Hungary  
EMBO Practical Course on Computational Analysis of Protein--Protein Interactions  
[Material](http://aidanbudd.github.io/ppisnd/programme.html)

16--20 May 2016, Rostock, Germany  
Integration of Data and Models in Medicine

12--15 March 2016, Bertinoro, Italy  
Bioinformatics Spring School

11 March 2016, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Fundamental Bioinformatics

8--13 March 2015, Safed, Israel  
The Literature Text Mining Approach In Cancer Research  
[Material](https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B3LtU3DLB8MQbnQzdUUyNUhNR00)

21 October 2015, Lyngby, Denmark  
Chemoinformatics in Drug Discovery

28 September--3 October 2015, Norwich, United Kingdom  
EMBO Practical Course on Computational Analysis of Protein--Protein Interactions  
[Material](https://aidanbudd.github.io/course_EMBO_at_TGAC_PPI_Sep2015/)

17 September 2015, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Bioinformatics for Human Biologists

24--26 June 2015, Warsaw, Poland  
In silico Drug Discovery

12 June 2015, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Statistics on Big Biomedical Data

17--22 April 2015, Okinawa, Japan  
EMBO Practical Course on Computational Biology

9 April 2015, Osaka, Japan  
Honor Seminar at Osaka University

21--27 March 2015, Bertinoro, Italy  
Bioinformatics Spring School

3 March 2015, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Fundamental Bioinformatics

28 September--3 October 2014, Cape Town, South Africa  
EMBO Practical Course on Computational Analysis of Protein--Protein Interactions

3--9 April 2014, Puerto Varas, Chile  
EMBO Practical Course on Computational Biology

22--26 March 2014, Bertinoro, Italy  
Bioinformatics Spring School

14 March 2014, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Fundamental Bioinformatics

21--25 October 2013, Sydney, Australia  
EMBL-Australia Masterclass on Protein Sequence Analysis

29 September--4 October 2013, Nevşehir, Turkey  
EMBO Practical Course on Computational Biology

19 September 2013, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Bioinformatics for Human Biologists

24--25 June 2013, Martinsried, Germany  
MaxQuant Summer School

15 March 2013, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Fundamental Bioinformatics

2--6 March 2013, Seeon--Seebruck, Germany  
Bioinformatics Spring School

15 November 2012, Lyngby, Denmark  
Chemoinformatics in Drug Discovery

13--14 November 2012, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Mass Spectrometry-based Proteomics and its Applications in Biology

14--20 October 2012, Girona, Spain  
EMBO Practical Course on Computational Biology

1--5 October 2012, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Bioinformatics for Human Biologists

2--8 September 2012, Berlin, Germany  
EMBO Practical Course on Computational Analysis of Protein--Protein Interactions

17--21 March 2012, Hainburg, Austria  
Bioinformatics Spring School

17 November 2011, Lyngby, Denmark  
Chemoinformatics in Drug Discovery

15 November 2011, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Mass Spectrometry-based Proteomics and its Applications in Biology

27--30 September, Heidelberg, Denmark  
EMBO Practical Course on Protein Bioinformatics Tools

6--13 August 2011, Reykjavík, Iceland  
EMBO Practical Course on Computational Biology

26--27 May 2011, Martinsried, Germany  
MaxQuant Summer School

12--16 March 2011, Ronzano, Italy  
Bioinformatics Spring School

18 November 2010, Lyngby, Denmark  
Chemoinformatics in Drug Discovery

16 November 2010, Copenhagen, Denmark  
Mass Spectrometry-based Proteomics and its Applications in Biology

14--15 March 2010, Hohenkammer, Germany  
Bioinformatics Spring School

26 January 2010, Lyngby, Denmark  
Workshop on Drug Discovery Informatics

19--22 January 2010, Heidelberg, Germany  
Exploring Modular Protein Architecture

19 November 2009, Lyngby, Denmark  
Chemoinformatics in Drug Discovery

16--22 August 2009, Shanghai, China  
EMBO World Practical Course on Computational Biology

14 May 2009, Lyngby, Denmark  
BioSys Workshop

22--26 March 2009, Bertinoro, Italy  
Bioinformatics Spring School
